---
title: May 2024 Newsletter
summary: Highlights for May - Showcasing ***X*** Community Projects
slug: newsletter-2024-05
author: Michael Kutowski
date: '2024-04-02' 
draft: false
categories:
  - newsletter
  - odin
---

Read up on the compiler changes in the [monthly release](https://github.com/odin-lang/Odin/releases/tag/dev-2024-05) notes.

## Game Releases

Im proud to announce that two games have been released this month! We've mentioned both of these before so please check them out.

WIP NEWS

## Projects shared this month

| Project Name | Description |
| --- | --- | 
| example |  |

## Project Showcase

We're going with the same layout as last month, let's see how it goes again. 

## Text Editor Experimentation Part 1 - `Skytrias`

Earlier this year I became a bit stuck with personal projects. During that time I got angry at Sublime for crashing very often.

This sparked an interest in making an odin specific editor. It didn't have to do everything, but I wanted to give it a more serious try. Given that the odin `core:odin` library exists to read odin files / packages, it looked like a pretty simple project.

### Craving a Challenge 

Well you may have guessed it. I wanted to try something more difficult, so I decided to take one different idea for this project.

Non-Linear text editing is what I called it. Meaning not having to care about separating code into files. It would be done automatically and the editor would be more like an IDE. 

<video class="ratio ratio-16x9 mb-1 rounded" controls src="/images/news/2024-05-skytrias1.mp4"></video>

Here is a a short preview of what I got working pretty quickly. 
- Left: structs, procedures, etc + identifier
- Middle: buffer name + buffer content
- Right: Preview of the file output

### What happened?

You can see mostly everything is done already? By the time the project was ~1 week old. The thing is, getting raw text editors to work is actually quite simple. As soon as you can edit bytes and navigate around, you're basically done. 

One feature I really missed from [4coder](https://4coder.net/) was *virtual whitespace*, which automatically indents each line. Implementing this for odin was pretty simple.

### The Rest

While syntax highlighting was easy, auto-completion with code *intelligence* turned out to be more trouble. At some point I though about just using OLS LSP but by the time I had already lost interest in the project.

<video class="ratio ratio-16x9 mb-1 rounded" controls src="/images/news/2024-05-skytrias2.mp4"></video>

Here is the current state of the project.
- Split with individual buffer being slightly highlighted and can be navigated to/from.
- Toggle details of buffers
- Jump to Definition
- Copy/Paste
- Undo/Redo
- Versioned buffers in a database

## EXMAPLE

### EXAMPLE SUB
