---
title: 2025 Q4 and 2026 Q1 Newsletter
summary: Highlights for Quarter 1 of 2026
slug: newsletter-2026-Q1
author: Ginger Bill
date: '2026-02-11'
categories:
  - newsletter
  - odin
---

## Odin Changes in Detail

### New and Improved `core:os`

Odin has been designed to be a pragmatic and evolutionary language, and as such, most people have come to appreciate the results of that, especially stability of language features. Odin rarely experiences breaking changes, however we have some technical debt to pay. In the previous article [Moving Towards a New "core:os"](/news/moving-towards-a-new-core-os/) from October 2025, we discussed the rationale behind updating package `core:os` and the general design improvements that come with it.

If you require the old functionality of `core:os`, it is still available under `core:os/old`, but this will be removed in the future (Q3 2026).

### `#+feature using-stmt`

`using` as a statement has been a controversial feature of Odin for a long time. `using` on struct fields has been shown to be an extremely useful construct with very few issues in practice but the use of `using` as a statement has caused problems in general. We are _not_ removing the feature but instead making `using` as a statement and procedure parameter modifier an opt-in feature on a per-file basis rather than having it on by default. This can be enabled by placing `#+feature using-stmt` at the top of the file that requires it.

`using` on struct fields still works as expected and will continue to do so.

### Link Time Optimization (LTO) Support

Link Time Optimization (LTO) is a technique which allows the compiler to improve the performance of a program by optimizing it at the linking stage, allowing the compiler to analyse and optimize across multiple translation units. This can lead to better runtime performance by removing unused code and better support for inlining procedures from different translation units.

This can be enabled in Odin with the compiler flags: `-lto:thin` and `-lto:thin-files`, and the flags will enable `-use-separate-modules` (if not already set) and default to `-linker:lld`.

* `-lto:thin` (one module per package)
* `-lto:thin-files` (one module per file)


### Tail Call Support with `#must_tail`

Odin now supports the explicit ability to state how to optimize for tail calls through the new directive `#must_tail` and new calling conventions `"preserve/none"`, `"preserve/most"`, and `"preserve/all"`.

* Note: The use of tail calls may cause issues with address sanitization tooling due to its nature.
* Note: This is a very advanced feature, and should only be used by people who know how to use it and need it.

Code example:

```odin
Op_Code :: enum i32 {
    PUSH, ADD, SUB, MUL, DIV, HLT,
}

Instr :: struct {
    opc: Op_Code,
    imm: i32,
}

VM :: struct {
    stack: [10]i32,
    sp:    int,
}

push :: proc "contextless" (vm: ^VM, v: i32) {
    vm.stack[vm.sp] = v
    vm.sp += 1
}
pop :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM) -> i32 {
    vm.sp -= 1
    return vm.stack[vm.sp]
}

// The tail-calling threaded interpreter approach
exec :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
    do_push :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
        push(vm, instrs[0].imm)
        return #must_tail exec(vm, instrs[1:])
    }
    do_add :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
        push(vm, pop(vm) + pop(vm))
        return #must_tail exec(vm, instrs[1:])
    }
    do_sub :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
        push(vm, pop(vm) - pop(vm))
        return #must_tail exec(vm, instrs[1:])
    }
    do_mul :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
        push(vm, pop(vm) * pop(vm))
        return #must_tail exec(vm, instrs[1:])
    }
    do_div :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
        push(vm, pop(vm) / pop(vm))
        return #must_tail exec(vm, instrs[1:])
    }
    do_hlt :: proc "preserve/none" (vm: ^VM, instrs: [^]Instr) -> i32 {
        return pop(vm)
    }

    @(static, rodata) LUT := [Op_Code](proc "preserve/none" (^VM, [^]Instr) -> i32) {
        .PUSH = do_push,
        .ADD  = do_ADD,
        .SUB  = do_SUB,
        .MUL  = do_MUL,
        .DIV  = do_DIV,
        .HLT  = do_HLT,
    }

    return #must_tail LUT[instrs[0].opc](vm, instrs)
}
```

### Licensing Changes to zlib from BSD 3-clause

Odin has recently changed its licence for the source code from BSD 3-clause to zlib. This decision was driven by a desire for greater simplicity, legal clarity, and to remove many potentially restrictive clauses.

Both the Odin compiler source code and the bundled library collections (`base` and `core`) will be under the new zlib licence. Each `vendor` package might have its own licence.

### Native Support for UTF-16 strings: `string16` and `cstring16`

Odin by default supports UTF-8 and Unicode out-of-the-box.

### `chacha8rand` as the Default Random Generator

Odin's default `context.random_generator` is now based on the [chacha8rand](https://github.com/C2SP/C2SP/blob/main/chacha8rand.md) CSPRNG generator seeded from system entropy by default.


Note: This is a breaking change since the output for a given seed will be different from the previous PCG64 generator.

We have heavily optimized this generator with SIMD to ensure it is both fast and has good properties.

### `struct #all_or_none` and `struct #simple`

`struct #all_or_none` is a new struct directive where struct literals must have all or none of their fields set when declaring a compound literal with named fields.

`struct #simple` is a new struct directive which forces a struct to use simple comparison if all of the fields are "nearly simply comparable". This is a niche solution to a niche problem. "Simply comparable" are types which can be compared with the equivalent of C's memcmp directly (e.g. integers, booleans, aggregates of them), and "nearly simply comparable" include the simply comparable types and floats, since floats have different rules for +0, -0, and NaN, and are NEARLY simply comparable if you don't care about those edge cases. This struct directive will force a struct to be "simply comparable" even if its fields would make it "nearly simply comparable".

## New Packages

### `core:nbio`

Documentation: <https://pkg.odin-lang.org/core/nbio/>

Package `core:nbio` implements a non-blocking I/O and event loop abstraction layer over several platform-specific asynchronous I/O APIs.

Examples: <https://github.com/odin-lang/examples/tree/master/nbio>

All main targets of Odin are supported:

* Windows (IOCP)
* Linux (io_uring)
* Darwin, OpenBSD, NetBSD, FreeBSD (kQueue)

Targets that are not currently supported are stubbed out and compile, but will error on `unimplemented`ness.

In the future, this package will be the basis of the `core:net/http` package, which is coming soon.

**We already know we'll get this question: Why callbacks? What about callback hell?!**

Callbacks are the simplest interface an event loop can reasonably expose: run this when the operation completes. The loop itself does not need to know how the result is consumed[^control-to-user].

[^control-to-user]: For instance you could give control of the entire loop to the user, but that comes with all the problems with that.

It is possible to apply other mechanisms that can be built on top of the callback system such as a coroutine system (either through something like Lua or a native coroutine package), or have a queue you continue at your own time ([No Callback example](https://github.com/odin-lang/examples/blob/master/nbio/no-callbacks/main.odin)).

Callbacks also allow multiple independent users to share the same event loop. A package can register its own operations, and the application code can register others, all without either seeing or handling the other's completions.


### `core:container/xar`

Documentation: <https://pkg.odin-lang.org/core/container/xar/>

Package `core:container/xar` implements data structures related to exponential arrays. They are dynamically growing arrays using exponentially-sized chunks, providing stable memory addresses for all elements. Unlike `[dynamic]T`, elements never move once allocated, making it safe to hold pointers to elements.

For more information about this data structure in general: <https://azmr.uk/dyn/#exponential-arrayxar>


### `core:container/handle_map`

Documentation: <https://pkg.odin-lang.org/core/container/handle_map/>

Package `core:container/handle_map` implements a generational-index based handle containers, both [static](https://pkg.odin-lang.org/core/container/handle_map/#Static_Handle_Map) and [dynamic](https://pkg.odin-lang.org/core/container/handle_map/#Dynamic_Handle_Map).

Example:

```odin
import hm "core:container/handle_map"

Handle :: hm.Handle32

Entity :: struct {
    handle: Handle,
    pos:    [2]f32,
}

{ // static map
    entities: hm.Static_Handle_Map(1024, Entity, Handle)

    h1 := hm.add(&entities, Entity{pos = {1,  4}})
    h2 := hm.add(&entities, Entity{pos = {9, 16}})

    if e, ok := hm.get(&entities, h2); ok {
        e.pos.x += 32
    }

    hm.remove(&entities, h1)

    h3 := hm.add(&entities, Entity{pos = {6, 7}})

    it := hm.iterator_make(&entities)
    for e, h in hm.iterate(&it) {
        e.pos += {1, 2}
    }
}

{ // dynamic map
    entities: hm.Dynamic_Handle_Map(Entity, Handle)
    hm.dynamic_init(&entities, context.allocator)
    defer hm.dynamic_destroy(&entities)

    h1 := hm.add(&entities, Entity{pos = {1,  4}})
    h2 := hm.add(&entities, Entity{pos = {9, 16}})

    if e, ok := hm.get(&entities, h2); ok {
        e.pos.x += 32
    }

    hm.remove(&entities, h1)

    h3 := hm.add(&entities, Entity{pos = {6, 7}})

    it := hm.iterator_make(&entities)
    for e, h in hm.iterate(&it) {
        e.pos += {1, 2}
    }
}
```

### `core:crypto/ecdh`

Package `core:crypto/ecdh` is a unification of `X25519` and `X448`, and adds support for `secp256r1` and `secp384r1`.

For more information, see the PR: <https://github.com/odin-lang/Odin/pull/6213>

### `vendor:curl`

Documentation: <https://pkg.odin-lang.org/vendor/curl/>

Odin now bundles with libCURL as part of its `vendor` package; the free and open-source client-side URL transfer library that supports numerous internet protocols, including HTTP, FTP, and so much more.